.. Author: Akshay Mestry <xa@mes3.dev>
.. Created on: Friday, August 11 2023
.. Last updated on: Tuesday, December 26 2023

.. _demystifying-buzzwords:

##########################
Demystifying the Buzzwords
##########################
.. sectnum:: 
.. reading::
.. authors::
    :affiliations: DePaul University\nJarvis College of Computing and Digital Media\nChicago, IL 60604, USA
    :emails: xa@mes3.dev
    :names: Akshay Mestry
    :links: https://linkedin.com/in/xames3

************
Introduction
************

As we embark on this chapter, I'm eager to delve into the often-misunderstood
buzzwords like Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Neural Networks, and
others. Some of these terms have become increasingly popular since 2010, yet
I've noticed a mix-up in their usage, both within my professional circle and
beyond. It's common to hear these terms being used interchangeably, with
systems labeled as *"AI-based"* or *"ML-based"*, and companies touted as
*"AI-first"*. But, do these labels accurately reflect their meanings, or is
there more to these buzzwords than meets the eye? In pursuit of clarity, my
first step is to dissect the meanings of "Intelligence" and "Learning". Here,
my focus is on human intelligence, as it provides a crucial reference point
for understanding AI. While acknowledging that intelligence manifests
diversely across different species, our primary exploration will center on its
human aspect. In the context of computer science, these concepts of
intelligence and learning are deeply intertwined with data |dash| the
cornerstone of knowledge and information processing in this digital age.

|tab| This chapter is not just about defining these terms; it's about peeling
back the layers to reveal the nuances and intricacies they encompass. By
understanding what each of these buzzwords truly signifies, and how they
interplay within the broader landscape of AI, we'll gain a deeper appreciation
of the field. Join me as I unravel these terms, exploring their proper use and
the common misconceptions surrounding them, ultimately leading to a more
informed and nuanced understanding of the exciting world of Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning. Moreover, in this chapter, we won't limit
ourselves to theoretical definitions alone. I will also guide you through the
practical applications of these technologies. Understanding how Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Neural Networks are utilized in various
industries and sectors can provide a more tangible grasp of their relevance
and potential. From healthcare and finance to autonomous vehicles and beyond,
we will explore how these buzzwords translate into groundbreaking innovations
and everyday solutions. This practical lens is crucial as it connects the
abstract concepts of intelligence and learning with real-world impact,
illustrating the transformative power of AI and ML in shaping our present and
future. So, as I dissect these terms, we'll also be uncovering the myriad ways
they're being employed to solve complex problems, enhance human capabilities,
and redefine the technological landscape.

************
Intelligence
************

In my exploration of Artificial Intelligence, one term frequently arises: *"Intelligence"*. According to Google...

.. epigraph:: Intelligence is the ability to acquire and apply knowledge and
    skills to solve a particular problem at hand.
    
Some experts describe it as the capacity to solve complex issues or make
informed decisions using prior knowledge, akin to personal traits like height
or strength. The quest for a definitive understanding of intelligence is
complex and multi-faceted, and no single definition can capture its entirety.
But in the context of AI, our quest isn't to pinpoint a rigid definition, but
rather to grasp the essence of intelligence in all its dimensions. Let's
reflect on this concept again. At its most fundamental level, intelligence
involves learning something and then applying that acquired knowledge. This
process, simple in description yet profound in implication, is what lies at
the heart of both human and artificial intelligence. In AI, this is mirrored
through algorithms that learn from data and then utilize these learnings to
perform tasks or make predictions. Understanding the nuances of this process
|dash| how information is learned, the ways it can be applied, and the varying
contexts it operates within |dash| is crucial. This understanding underpins
the entire field of AI.

|tab| As I delve deeper into this topic, I aim to unravel the layers of what
intelligence means, especially about AI. We'll explore how this fundamental
concept of learning and applying not only shapes human cognition but also
forms the foundational principle of AI systems. It's a journey through the
intricate relationship between knowledge, application, and the diverse
manifestations of intelligence in our increasingly digital world. In addition
to understanding the foundational aspects of intelligence, it's also important
to recognize its evolving nature, especially in the context of AI. As we delve
deeper into Artificial Intelligence, we see that just like human intelligence,
AI is not static; it evolves, adapts, and improves over time. This dynamic
aspect of AI, where algorithms learn from new data, adapt to changing
environments, and potentially even develop new ways of problem-solving, is a
fascinating parallel to human cognitive growth.

.. tweet:: https://twitter.com/stevenheidel/status/1736817896314351873

|tab| In our exploration, we will not only focus on the current state of AI
but also consider its potential for future development. How does AI's ability
to learn and adapt today shape what it could become tomorrow? This perspective
is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of AI and for envisioning how it
might continue to transform our world. By keeping in mind both the established
definitions and the progressive nature of intelligence, we can gain a richer,
more nuanced understanding of what it means for a machine to be
*"intelligent"*. This exploration is key to appreciating the full scope and
potential of AI, as we continue to witness its remarkable journey from a
concept to a transformative force in our lives. In my experience of what
intelligence truly means, I've observed a fascinating aspect of our human
nature and that of some mammals. Throughout our lives, we're engaged in a
continuous process of learning and adapting. This ongoing development of
skills and knowledge, and their application in various contexts, is the very
essence of intelligence at work. Unlike something tangible and localized,
intelligence is an abstract, multi-faceted capability. It encompasses our
ability to analyze, learn, adapt, and wisely use information |dash| a complex
trait that we, as a species, have evolved over thousands of years.

|tab| To put this into perspective, let's consider a few illustrative examples
from our evolutionary past. Picture early humans learning to utilize sticks
and twigs, not just as tools but as instruments of defense. Initially, simple
bamboo sticks or dried tree branches were employed to fend off predators.
However, as these methods gradually lost their efficacy, our ancestors began
to innovate |dash| sharpening the ends of these sticks, or even using fire to
enhance their defensive capabilities. This evolution of tool usage showcases
the adaptive nature of human intelligence, where learning from experiences
leads to better, more effective solutions. Another example that resonates with
most of us is the instinctive reaction to touching a hot surface. We've all
experienced that sudden withdrawal upon contact with something scalding. This
immediate response, followed by a cautious approach in similar future
situations, is a prime example of learning and adapting based on experience.
It highlights how intelligence isn't just about knowledge acquisition but also
about applying that knowledge to ensure better outcomes. As I delve deeper
into the realms of Artificial Intelligence, these reflections on human
intelligence provide a vital backdrop. They help us understand the challenges
in replicating such adaptive and learning capabilities in AI systems. In AI,
we are attempting to emulate this depth and flexibility of human intelligence,
understanding that it is not a static trait but a dynamic, evolving one. This
journey of understanding the essence of intelligence, both in humans and 
machines, is not just intellectually enriching but also crucial in our quest
to advance AI technologies.

.. figure:: ../img/touch-to-burn.gif
    :alt:  Learning through experience

    Learning through experience: How our instinctive reaction to a hot surface
    mirrors the fundamental process of human learning and adaptation. This
    everyday example illustrates the essence of intelligence - not only in
    acquiring knowledge but also in applying it to avoid harm. It reflects the
    continuous evolution of human understanding, a concept at the core of
    developing adaptive and responsive AI systems.

|tab| Furthermore, in the backdrop of these examples and insights, it's
important to acknowledge that the study of intelligence, both in biological
and artificial systems, is an area of ongoing research and spirited debate.
The field is continually evolving, with new theories and findings emerging
that challenge our existing understanding. This dynamic nature of intelligence
research is something that I find particularly intriguing and it forms an
integral part of our exploration in L.E.A.R.N. In my exploration of human
intelligence, I've come to understand its deep roots in our survival
instincts. Throughout the millennia, this innate drive has shaped our
intellect, continually evolving and improving. It's vital to appreciate that
this journey of discovery and adaptation wasn't swift; it involved a gradual,
often painstaking process of learning from our environment and experiences.
Our ancestors faced numerous challenges, and through trial and error, they
developed and honed strategies for survival, leading to the sophisticated
level of intelligence we possess today.

|tab| As I delve deeper, I'm struck by the ongoing debates among scientists
and researchers about defining and measuring intelligence. Is it a
quantifiable entity, or something more abstract? Furthermore, the intricate
relationship between intelligence and consciousness adds another layer of
complexity. The ability to be aware of and understand our surroundings plays a
crucial role in how we solve problems. This suggests that intelligence isn't
just about the actions we take but also about our consciousness of the
situation we are in. Therefore, when I reflect on intelligence, I see it as a
symphony of actions and awareness. It's the entire process of recognizing a
problem, conceptualizing a solution based on past learnings, experimenting,
and then refining our approach based on feedback. This dynamic, iterative
process is what I aim to parallel in the world of Artificial Intelligence.
It's not solely about creating machines that solve problems; it's about
imbuing them with a level of *"awareness"* and the capacity to learn and
adapt. This perspective on human intelligence, with its intricate blend of
cognitive processes and consciousness, forms the foundation of my approach to
understanding and developing AI. It's a vast and fascinating field, where each
discovery about our intelligence opens new possibilities for artificial minds.

.. tweet:: https://twitter.com/ilyasut/status/1710462485411561808

|tab| In addition to reflecting on the evolution of human intelligence and its
profound connection to consciousness, it's also crucial to consider the
implications of these insights for the future trajectory of Artificial
Intelligence. As we continue to unravel the mysteries of human cognition and
consciousness, we gain valuable perspectives that can guide the development of
more advanced, responsive, and perhaps even empathetic AI systems.
Understanding the intricate processes behind human learning, decision-making,
and problem-solving can inspire new models and algorithms in AI. This
knowledge could lead to the creation of AI systems that not only mimic human
intelligence more closely but also interact with us in more intuitive and
meaningful ways. Furthermore, these insights into human intelligence bring to
light ethical considerations that are increasingly important in AI
development. As we strive to create machines that resemble human thinking,
questions about AI autonomy, decision-making, and the role of AI in society
become more pertinent. It's a reminder that the journey of AI is not just a
technical endeavor but also a deeply philosophical and ethical one. In this
context, my exploration into AI is not only about understanding or replicating
human intelligence but also about envisioning the future of AI and its role in
our lives. It's about shaping a future where AI enhances human capabilities
and operates in harmony with our values and ethical principles.

********
Learning
********

In my exploration of learning, I've come to understand it as an intricate
process that goes far beyond mere information acquisition. To me, learning
involves engaging our senses |dash| vision, sound, smell, touch, and taste, to
gather and interpret information about the world around us. This sensory
exploration is fundamental, yet it's distinct from intelligence. While there
are overlaps, intelligence, in my view, is a more encompassing concept. It's
not just about learning; it's about how we use that learned information to
navigate and make decisions in our lives. Learning, then, is a vital subset of
intelligence. It's about delving deep into a subject, unraveling its
complexities, and expanding our understanding. The information we absorb
through our senses lays the groundwork for further learning actions. Without
this sensory input, our reactions and adaptability to new situations would be
severely limited. This realization highlights the critical role of information
in the learning process. But learning isn't just about gathering information;
it's also about retention. The ability to store this information in our memory
is what transforms fleeting experiences into lasting knowledge. This storage
aspect is crucial, as it allows us to build on past experiences and
continuously expand our understanding. As I delve into the realm of learning,
I see fascinating parallels with how AI systems learn. Like us, AI systems
gather data (their version of sensory input) and store patterns and
information. This process enables them to *"learn"* and make informed
decisions based on past inputs. In exploring these parallels, I aim to shed
light on both the human learning process and AI learning mechanisms. It's a
journey through the multi-faceted landscape of cognition, where human and
artificial intelligence intersect, each providing insights into the other.

|tab| Moreover, it's important to emphasize that learning, both for humans and
AI is an ongoing and evolving journey. In humans, this continuous process
shapes our understanding, behaviors, and skills throughout our lives. We are
not just passive recipients of information; we actively engage with and adapt
to new experiences and knowledge. This adaptability is a hallmark of our
intelligence. Similarly, in the realm of AI, learning is not a one-time event
but a continuous process. AI systems are designed to learn from new data,
adapt to changing environments, and improve their performance over time. This
ability to evolve and refine their knowledge base and decision-making
processes is what makes AI both powerful and promising. In this context,
exploring learning is about understanding this dynamic process |dash| how we
gather, store, and adapt information over time, and how AI systems mirror this
ability in their unique way. It's about recognizing that learning is an
ever-changing landscape, full of challenges and opportunities for growth, both
for us as individuals and for the AI technologies we develop.

|tab| In my exploration of the learning process, I've come to recognize the
pivotal role of memory. Memorization is not merely about storing information;
it's a fundamental aspect of learning that enables us to build upon what we've
previously encountered. This concept becomes vividly clear when observing a
toddler learning to walk. To me, a toddler represents an embodiment of the
learning journey, a journey marked by persistence, experimentation, and the
crucial role of memory. Consider the early stages of a toddler's life. The
initial challenge of rolling over might seem insurmountable to the little one,
but with each attempt, the child learns and adapts. Through repetition and
recall of what works and what doesn't, progress is made. Once rolling over is
mastered, the toddler ventures into crawling, using hands and feet in
coordination. This phase is more than mere movement; it's a complex
integration of previously learned skills, all stored and retrieved from
memory. The journey continues as the toddler attempts to stand. Each faltering
step is a learning experience, a trial that feeds into the child's growing
repository of knowledge. Memory plays a key role here, as each attempt,
successful or unsuccessful, informs the next. Eventually, the child stands and
then walks. These milestones are not just physical achievements but are the
culmination of a sophisticated process of learning and memorizing.

.. figure:: ../img/toddler-learning-to-walk.png
    :alt:  A toddler learning to walk in multiple stages

    The evolution of learning and memory in action: Tracing a toddler's
    journey from rolling over to walking. This sequence captures the essence
    of gradual skill acquisition and the pivotal role of memory in each phase.
    It begins with mastering rolling over, progresses to the coordination
    required in crawling, advances through the challenge of standing, and
    culminates in the triumphant first steps of walking. Each stage represents
    not just physical growth, but the intricate process of learning,
    remembering, and building upon past experiences

|tab| In drawing parallels to Artificial Intelligence, I see a reflection of
this process. AI systems, in their way, *"learn"* by gathering data,
processing it, and *"remembering"* patterns. This mimicry of human learning
and memorization is fascinating and offers profound insights into the
potential of AI. It's a reminder that learning, whether in humans or machines,
is an intricate tapestry woven from experiences, trials, and the continuous
process of building upon past knowledge. Furthermore, it's important to
acknowledge the challenges inherent in translating these natural learning
processes into AI systems. While the parallels between a toddler's learning
journey and AI's learning mechanisms offer valuable insights, the replication
of human-like learning in machines presents a unique set of complexities. AI
systems, though capable of processing and *"remembering"* vast amounts of data,
still face limitations in replicating the nuanced and adaptive nature of human
learning. We need to understand the limitations of AI in mimicking human
learning processes, such as the understanding of context, the application of
learned knowledge in varied situations, and the ability to learn from minimal
input. It's about recognizing the remarkable capabilities of AI while also
being mindful of the journey ahead in achieving a level of learning and
understanding that truly mirrors human cognition. This acknowledgment not only
informs our approach to AI development but also fosters an appreciation for
the intricate and sophisticated nature of our learning abilities.

|tab| In my studies and observations of the natural world, I've been
continually fascinated by the universal nature of learning. It's a phenomenon
that transcends human boundaries, evident in nearly all forms of life. From
the terrestrial mammals that instinctively learn to walk and swim to the birds
that master the art of flight, learning is an integral part of life's
tapestry. This process, which seems so intuitive and ingrained, has always
intrigued me. Observing a baby as it navigates its first steps or a bird as it
takes to the skies, one can't help but marvel at the innate ability that
drives these milestones. These instinctive behaviors, which occur without
formal instruction, suggest a profound intelligence embedded within each
species. It raises compelling questions about the nature of intelligence
|dash| is it the manifestation of deeply rooted instincts, or is it something
that transcends innate behaviors? This conundrum is one that researchers and
scientists grapple with, as the boundary between instinctual behavior and
learned intelligence often blurs into a fascinating gray area.

.. tweet:: https://twitter.com/NWF/status/965336370175606784

Some theories propose that these innate abilities are the result of
evolutionary processes, honed over generations for survival and efficiency. As
I delve deeper into this subject, I find myself pondering the intricate
relationship between instinct, learning, and intelligence. It's a relationship
that not only defines the survival and development of a species but also
highlights the remarkable adaptability and complexity inherent in nature. In
exploring these ideas, I aim to capture the essence of learning in its
broadest sense |dash| not just as a human endeavor but as a fundamental
characteristic of life. The way a child learns to walk, or a bird learns to
fly, isn't merely a function of biology; it's a testament to the intelligence
that permeates the natural world. These natural phenomena, often overlooked in
their simplicity, are in reality profound expressions of life's inherent
wisdom and adaptability.
