.. Author: Akshay Mestry <xa@mes3.dev>
.. Created on: Friday, August 11 2023
.. Last updated on: Monday, December 25 2023

.. _demystifying-buzzwords:

##########################
Demystifying the Buzzwords
##########################
.. sectnum:: 
.. reading::
.. authors::
    :affiliations: DePaul University\nJarvis College of Computing and Digital Media\nChicago, IL 60604, USA
    :emails: xa@mes3.dev
    :names: Akshay Mestry
    :links: https://linkedin.com/in/xames3

************
Introduction
************

As we embark on this chapter, I'm eager to delve into the often-misunderstood
buzzwords like Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Neural Networks, and
others. Some of these terms have become increasingly popular since 2010, yet
I've noticed a mix-up in their usage, both within my professional circle and
beyond. It's common to hear these terms being used interchangeably, with
systems labeled as *"AI-based"* or *"ML-based"*, and companies touted as
*"AI-first"*. But, do these labels accurately reflect their meanings, or is
there more to these buzzwords than meets the eye? In pursuit of clarity, my
first step is to dissect the meanings of "Intelligence" and "Learning". Here,
my focus is on human intelligence, as it provides a crucial reference point
for understanding AI. While acknowledging that intelligence manifests
diversely across different species, our primary exploration will center on its
human aspect. In the context of computer science, these concepts of
intelligence and learning are deeply intertwined with data |dash| the
cornerstone of knowledge and information processing in this digital age.

|tab| This chapter is not just about defining these terms; it's about peeling
back the layers to reveal the nuances and intricacies they encompass. By
understanding what each of these buzzwords truly signifies, and how they
interplay within the broader landscape of AI, we'll gain a deeper appreciation
of the field. Join me as I unravel these terms, exploring their proper use and
the common misconceptions surrounding them, ultimately leading to a more
informed and nuanced understanding of the exciting world of Artificial
Intelligence and Machine Learning. Moreover, in this chapter, we won't limit
ourselves to theoretical definitions alone. I will also guide you through the
practical applications of these technologies. Understanding how Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning, and Neural Networks are utilized in various
industries and sectors can provide a more tangible grasp of their relevance
and potential. From healthcare and finance to autonomous vehicles and beyond,
we will explore how these buzzwords translate into groundbreaking innovations
and everyday solutions. This practical lens is crucial as it connects the
abstract concepts of intelligence and learning with real-world impact,
illustrating the transformative power of AI and ML in shaping our present and
future. So, as I dissect these terms, we'll also be uncovering the myriad ways
they're being employed to solve complex problems, enhance human capabilities,
and redefine the technological landscape.

******************
Human Intelligence
******************

In my exploration of Artificial Intelligence, one term frequently arises: *"Intelligence"*. According to Google...

.. epigraph:: Intelligence is the ability to acquire and apply knowledge and
    skills to solve a particular problem at hand.
    
Some experts describe it as the capacity to solve complex issues or make informed decisions using prior knowledge, akin to personal traits like height or strength. The quest for a definitive understanding of intelligence is complex and multi-faceted, and no single definition can capture its entirety. But in the context of AI, our quest isn't to pinpoint a rigid definition, but rather to grasp the essence of intelligence in all its dimensions. Let's reflect on this concept again. At its most fundamental level, intelligence involves learning something and then applying that acquired knowledge. This process, simple in description yet profound in implication, is what lies at the heart of both human and artificial intelligence. In AI, this is mirrored through algorithms that learn from data and then utilize these learnings to perform tasks or make predictions. Understanding the nuances of this process |dash| how information is learned, the ways it can be applied, and the varying contexts it operates within |dash| is crucial. This understanding underpins the entire field of AI.

|tab| As I delve deeper into this topic, I aim to unravel the layers of what
intelligence means, especially about AI. We'll explore how this fundamental
concept of learning and applying not only shapes human cognition but also
forms the foundational principle of AI systems. It's a journey through the
intricate relationship between knowledge, application, and the diverse
manifestations of intelligence in our increasingly digital world. In addition
to understanding the foundational aspects of intelligence, it's also important
to recognize its evolving nature, especially in the context of AI. As we delve
deeper into Artificial Intelligence, we see that just like human intelligence,
AI is not static; it evolves, adapts, and improves over time. This dynamic
aspect of AI, where algorithms learn from new data, adapt to changing
environments, and potentially even develop new ways of problem-solving, is a
fascinating parallel to human cognitive growth.

.. tweet:: https://twitter.com/stevenheidel/status/1736817896314351873

|tab| In our exploration, we will not only focus on the current state of AI
but also consider its potential for future development. How does AI's ability
to learn and adapt today shape what it could become tomorrow? This perspective
is crucial for a comprehensive understanding of AI and for envisioning how it
might continue to transform our world. By keeping in mind both the established
definitions and the progressive nature of intelligence, we can gain a richer,
more nuanced understanding of what it means for a machine to be
*"intelligent"*. This exploration is key to appreciating the full scope and
potential of AI, as we continue to witness its remarkable journey from a
concept to a transformative force in our lives. In my experience of what
intelligence truly means, I've observed a fascinating aspect of our human
nature and that of some mammals. Throughout our lives, we're engaged in a
continuous process of learning and adapting. This ongoing development of
skills and knowledge, and their application in various contexts, is the very
essence of intelligence at work. Unlike something tangible and localized,
intelligence is an abstract, multi-faceted capability. It encompasses our
ability to analyze, learn, adapt, and wisely use information |dash| a complex
trait that we, as a species, have evolved over thousands of years.

|tab| To put this into perspective, let's consider a few illustrative examples
from our evolutionary past. Picture early humans learning to utilize sticks
and twigs, not just as tools but as instruments of defense. Initially, simple
bamboo sticks or dried tree branches were employed to fend off predators.
However, as these methods gradually lost their efficacy, our ancestors began
to innovate |dash| sharpening the ends of these sticks, or even using fire to
enhance their defensive capabilities. This evolution of tool usage showcases
the adaptive nature of human intelligence, where learning from experiences
leads to better, more effective solutions. Another example that resonates with
most of us is the instinctive reaction to touching a hot surface. We've all
experienced that sudden withdrawal upon contact with something scalding. This
immediate response, followed by a cautious approach in similar future
situations, is a prime example of learning and adapting based on experience.
It highlights how intelligence isn't just about knowledge acquisition but also
about applying that knowledge to ensure better outcomes. As I delve deeper
into the realms of Artificial Intelligence, these reflections on human
intelligence provide a vital backdrop. They help us understand the challenges
in replicating such adaptive and learning capabilities in AI systems. In AI,
we are attempting to emulate this depth and flexibility of human intelligence,
understanding that it is not a static trait but a dynamic, evolving one. This
journey of understanding the essence of intelligence, both in humans and 
machines, is not just intellectually enriching but also crucial in our quest
to advance AI technologies.

.. figure:: ../img/touch-to-burn.gif
    :alt:  Learning through experience

    Learning through experience: How our instinctive reaction to a hot surface
    mirrors the fundamental process of human learning and adaptation. This
    everyday example illustrates the essence of intelligence - not only in
    acquiring knowledge but also in applying it to avoid harm. It reflects the
    continuous evolution of human understanding, a concept at the core of
    developing adaptive and responsive AI systems.

|tab| Our survival instincts as a species led us to develop this intellect and thus over the years it kept on improving. It is extremely important to remember that this way of figuring out a solution to a problem probably took us a very long time. But over time, our species understood the problem at hand, learnt and found a way around it. With time, we adopted different strategies and kept improvising. Now, it is often debated amongst many scientists and researchers how to measure or what intelligence is. To make matters worse, intelligence is also connected to consciousness since awareness is helpful in problem-solving. This process collectively is Intelligence. Understanding a problem statement or being aware or conscious of a situation, prototyping a solution based on experience, testing it out and improvising based on failures is how we learn. So intelligence is a set of actions that we do harmoniously to get something done.

****************
General Learning
****************

In simple terms, learning is a process of gathering and understanding information about something through senses such as vision, sound, smell, touch or taste. It is like intelligence but not completely. Intelligence is a collective process of learning and navigating our actions based on acquired knowledge. Whereas learning is a subset or part of the intelligence *process* wherein you try to gather more information, understand your problem and work on expanding your experiences about a particular subject. The gathered information about a subject through our senses is the basis of the next actions for learning. Without any information about a topic, we are unable to react appropriately or flexibly. Thus, having adequate information plays a significant role while learning. But only having information is not enough, we need to store it in memory too.

|tab| While learning something, saving information in the memory is crucial. Memorization is the ability of the mind to save and recall information so that a living being does not have to start from scratch every time it perceives something relevant. For example, consider a toddler. A toddler is perhaps one of the best examples to explain how learning works. A toddler learns to walk on its twos after a lot of repetitive trial and error, trying different manoeuvrings and memorizing actions and elements which worked along the way until it masters them.

.. figure:: ../img/toddler-learning-to-walk.png
    :alt:  A toddler learning to walk in multiple stages

    A toddler learning to walk throughout the multiple stages of its life

It starts by trying and learning to roll over its belly. This initial process takes some time for the little one as it is a new experience for him. Once it can transition from its back to belly seamlessly, it tries various gestures and learns to use its tiny little hands and feet to crawl like a commando thus moving forward or backwards. Once it is comfortable crawling, it starts using its feet for faster movements and starts using its knees. This is where it starts learning how to stand on twos. Initially, all its attempts to stand straight fail but with time and enough practice, it learns to hold itself without support. Once it is comfortable standing, it starts taking its first little steps. This is nothing but learning, a process of putting together a sequence of thoughts or actions. The toddler uses its little intellect to learn its way to stand and walk. It repeats its behaviours and adapts to new information. While learning to walk, it learns to sit and jump too simultaneously. The toddler understands the significance of sitting and jumping through their past experiences and how these activities aid in moving.

|tab| The act of learning is not restricted to humans. Almost all animals exhibit this behaviour. Humans and terrestrial mammals learn to walk and swim while birds learn to fly. A lot of this learning seems quite intuitive and hard-wired in our brains. We do not have to teach babies to walk or birds to fly. They do it based on their instincts. Researchers are not sure why this behaviour feels so natural though or maybe this is the intelligence of a species at work.

*************************
Intelligence v/s Learning
*************************

To summarize, intelligence is simply a collective process of problem-solving using various elements while learning is the process of gathering information through repetitive trial and error and building this intellect. Of course, there are other things like planning, creativity, rationalization, socializing, etc which are also some of the overlapping components while speaking of intelligence and learning. But we will focus on them later. While learning and building intelligence, it is crucial to understand what is necessary for problem-solving. Intelligence is merely a toolbox which holds various tools like analyzing, learning, testing and adapting whereas Learning itself is a tool. All we need to do is learn how to use them effectively.

|tab| I will try to explain the significance of applying intelligence and learning through a simple example. Animals like squirrels hoard their food for cold weather but cattle do not exhibit this behaviour. Through evolution, these animals have learnt their survival strategies. After a lot of trial and error, a squirrel has learnt that if it does not store enough food for colder weather it might not get sufficient food later. It had learnt this over thousands of years and thus has built enough intelligence to selectively hoard enough food for itself. On the other hand, consider a domesticated cow which does not worry about food in the cold weather. It lives in a group, a cattle. So for a cow, socializing plays a critical role in survival. The cow has learnt that if it stays with humans, it will be well fed irrespective of the weather. For the cow, the learning curve has stopped.

.. figure:: ../img/animals-survival-by-food.png
    :alt:  Cow vs Squirrel

    A cow enjoying its social life grazing through the meadows whilst a squirrel needs to work hard

The whole point of the above example is to make sure you understand where to focus your time and resources while building solutions. You as an engineer need to understand why are you developing something and how will it be used in real-world applications. You need to understand what you need rather than what you want. Do you need AI or ML? This is the question one must ask itself before venturing ahead.

***********************
Artificial Intelligence
***********************

If you understand the concept of human intelligence correctly, this is a no-brainer. To re-iterate, intelligence is the process of analyzing, understanding and learning about the available information and then prototyping a solution to the problem. Artificial Intelligence is the same thing but something that is simulated artificially by humans. When talking about AI, we talk about a system that is capable of comprehending and adapting to the presented problem and then finding a solution for it. It functions similarly to the intelligence exhibited by living entities |dash| acquiring information through senses, learning over time through repetitive variations and testing its outcomes against the problem to reward itself. This is what an AI is. It is a system that simulates a living entity (not necessarily a human but close) artificially. Here the term artificial implies something that is designed or programmed by humans and which is inherently not created naturally.

|tab| In lay terms, it is a system. Now the term system is used loosely in this context and can be defined in many different ways. It can be a computer program, a dedicated mesh of computer networks that talk to each other or some robotic framework for a particular task. So to define AI in simple terms, Artificial Intelligence is a system that is capable of simulating near-human intelligence or function like a human to solve a problem. Since the last decade, a lot of these AIs have been developed and now there has been a variety of these AIs out there like AIs playing games or AIs conversing with humans, etc. But at its core, these are nothing but machines or systems designed by humans to perform *a certain task*. We call these AIs, Artificial Narrow Intelligence or ANIs. There is another type of AI called Artificial General Intelligence or AGI. Both ANIs and AGIs are marvellous and extremely sophisticated in their designs but extremely difficult to build.

|tab| Almost all the AIs that are out there are examples of ANIs. They do perform similarly to humans to an extent but their reach is limited to a particular field or task. They cannot solve problems which they are not trained to solve. Whereas an AGI is a super-intelligent system that can act using its "subconscious" state to understand, debug and solve the problem. Unfortunately, AGIs don't exist yet. A researcher from Google claims they have seen their AI become conscious or sentient in its action but I believe it is far from truth. I am not saying that AGIS can't exist, what I am saying is it is very unlikely that we will hear about them sooner than we anticipate. Sure, the AIs that we have developed now are certainly capable of surprising us with the answers they provide to the complicated problems which we throw at them.
