.. Author: Akshay Mestry <xa@mes3.dev>
.. Created on: Wednesday, December 27 2023
.. Last updated on: Thursday, December 28 2023

.. _preface:

#######
Preface
#######

To the guiding stars in my journey, whose light continues to inspire and 
illuminate my path in the world of Artificial Intelligence and Machine
Learning, this preface is a heartfelt homage to your enduring impact on my
life and career.

At the forefront of this constellation of support stands my mother, Sunita.
Mum, your unwavering belief in my dreams and your constant encouragement have
been the foundation upon which I've built my aspirations. You taught me the
value of persistence, the beauty of dreaming big, and the importance of
embracing my passion for technology with open arms. Your faith in me has been
my guiding light through every challenge and milestone.

I am profoundly grateful to Sajith Malayath, my mentor and former Project
Manager at Accenture. Sajith, you were the first to see the potential in me
for Artificial Intelligence. Your guidance was a beacon that led me through
the uncharted territories of AI, providing platforms where my skills could not
only be showcased but also flourish. You nurtured an environment where
creativity and innovation were celebrated, and for that, I am eternally
thankful.

A special token of appreciation goes to Madhavi Rege, my esteemed Team Lead at
Accenture. Madhavi, under your mentorship, I evolved both professionally and
personally within the IT industry. Your expertise guided me in balancing the
art of innovation with practical implementation. The confidence and skills I
gained under your tutelage have been pivotal in my journey into unexplored
domains, enabling me to provide solutions with efficiency and effective time
management.

Amid these luminaries, I hold dear the memory of Charlotte, my late
girlfriend, whose presence in my life was nothing short of transformative.
Charlotte, you were the spark that ignited my deeper fascination with AI. Your
encouragement to delve into the intricacies of this field and your belief in
my ability to contribute meaningfully to it has been a source of relentless
motivation. It was your conviction in my potential as a teacher that guided me
toward this path of sharing knowledge and passion for AI. Your spirit
continues to inspire me to explore, learn, and teach with the same enthusiasm
and love that you showed.

A special token of appreciation goes to Shailesh Kewat, a friend whose role
in my life has been nothing short of monumental. Shailesh, your unwavering
support in my endeavors, whether it be teaching online or navigating the world
of public relations, has been invaluable. Your honest and supportive opinions
have always steered me in the right direction. Your presence has been a
cornerstone in my career, providing me with the confidence and support needed
to voice my ideas and share my knowledge with a broader audience.

Adding a new and vibrant chapter to this journey is my love interest, Cary
Robbins. Cary, your passion for your craft and your impeccable writing skills
have been a significant influence since we met. Your articulate expression and
dedication to excellence are qualities I strive to emulate. Your influence has
been central in shaping this platform, guiding me in articulating my thoughts
and sharing my knowledge with clarity and passion.

A heartfelt acknowledgment goes to the diligent proofreaders who have lent
their expertise to refine my content. Their meticulous efforts have enhanced
the quality of this platform, ensuring clarity and coherence. My heartfelt
thanks to Raghavindhraa Sir, Shilpa, Suz and Nornubari for their invaluable
contributions.

This platform, therefore, is more than just a platform for education on
Artificial Intelligence. It is a tribute to the lessons learned, the
encouragement received, and the love shared with each of you. It's a space
where I aspire to echo the guidance, inspiration, and passion you have
instilled in me.

To my readers, I invite you to join me in this journey of discovery and
understanding. May this platform be a conduit for knowledge, a spark for
curiosity, and a celebration of the endless possibilities that AI presents.

With the deepest gratitude and respect.

.. raw:: html

    <div class="preface-container">
        <div class="location-date">
            <p>Chicago, IL <span class="raw-html"><br></span> December 2023</p>
        </div>
        <div class="author-name">
            <p>Akshay Arvind Mestry</p>
        </div>
    </div>
